.TH LIBRJSS 3 "January 2026" "librjss 2.0.0" "Library Functions Manual"
.SH NAME
librjss \- Robust async Rust client for Juragan Subsystem (JSS) / Frappe / ERPNext APIs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SS Cargo dependency
.PP
.nf
\fB[dependencies]\fP
\fBlibrjss = { git = "https://github.com/mroczect/librjss.git" }\fP
.fi
.SS Import in Rust code
.PP
.nf
\fBuse librjss::{\fP
    \fBRjssClient, ClientConfig, AuthMode, JssError,\fP
    \fBSessionInfo, FrappeBoot, BootUser, BootUserInfo,\fP
    \fBSidebarPages, NavbarSettings, FrequentLink,\fP
    \fBUserInfo, ReportMeta, AppData,\fP
\fB};\fP
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBlibrjss\fR provides full access to a JSS (Frappe/ERPNext) server.
It supports:
.IP \[bu] 2
Cookie-based session authentication and token-based API key/secret authentication.
.IP \[bu]
Automatic CSRF token extraction from the \fB/app\fR dashboard.
.IP \[bu]
Configurable retry with exponential backoff.
.IP \[bu]
Typed builders for report execution, doctype CRUD, and file upload/download.
.IP \[bu]
A rich error model mirroring Frappe JSON error responses.
.IP \[bu]
Zero-framework – lightweight dependencies on \fBreqwest\fR, \fBserde\fR,
\fBsecrecy\fR, and a few other small crates.
.IP \[bu]
Unique trace ID per client for distributed tracing.
.PP
This manual documents every public module, struct, enum, trait, and method.
.SH CORE CONCEPTS
.SS RjssClient
Central struct holding configuration, HTTP client, session, credentials, and boot data.
.PP
\fBConstructor:\fR
.RS 4
.PP
\fBRjssClient::new(config: ClientConfig) -> Result<Self, JssError>\fR
.br
Validates configuration, builds a reqwest client with a cookie jar, timeout, and user-agent.
.RE
.PP
\fBAuthentication & session methods:\fR
.TP
\fBauthenticate(&mut self) -> Result<(), JssError>\fR
Logs in using session or token (depending on \fBAuthMode\fR). In session mode it stores credentials and calls login. Token mode directly constructs a synthetic \fBSessionInfo\fR.
.TP
\fBlogout(&mut self) -> Result<(), JssError>\fR
Only meaningful for \fBAuthMode::Session\fR. Sends a logout request with the CSRF token, then clears session and credentials.
.TP
\fBensure_session(&mut self) -> Result<(), JssError>\fR
Checks whether the current session is still valid by calling \fBget_logged_user\fR. If a 401 is returned the session is discarded and, if credentials are available, a fresh login is performed automatically.
.PP
\fBAccessors:\fR
.TP
\fBsession_info(&self) -> Option<&SessionInfo>\fR
Returns a reference to the current session data.
.TP
\fBboot(&self) -> Option<&FrappeBoot>\fR
Returns the boot data extracted from the /app page after login. Contains user info, permissions, sidebar, etc.
.TP
\fBbase_url(&self) -> &Url\fR
The base server URL in use.
.TP
\fBtrace_id(&self) -> &str\fR
Unique UUID v4 identifier for tracing/logging.
.PP
\fBAuthenticated HTTP requests:\fR
.TP
\fBauthenticated_get(&self, path: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
.TP
\fBauthenticated_post(&self, path: &str, body_json: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
.TP
\fBauthenticated_put(&self, path: &str, body_json: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
.TP
\fBauthenticated_delete(&self, path: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Each sends the corresponding HTTP request to the path joined with base_url. They attach the appropriate authorization header (token or CSRF) and handle retry with exponential backoff.
.PP
\fBFile operations:\fR
.TP
\fBupload_file(&self, file_name: &str, file_content: Vec<u8>, doctype: &str, docname: &str, fieldname: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Uploads a file to \fB/api/method/upload_file\fR using multipart/form-data. Returns the raw JSON response.
.TP
\fBdownload_file(&self, file_url: &str) -> Result<Vec<u8>, JssError>\fR
Downloads a file from a relative URL (e.g., "/files/photo.png"). Returns raw bytes.
.TP
\fBdownload_file_to_path(&self, file_url: &str, save_path: &Path) -> Result<(), JssError>\fR
Same as above, but writes directly to disk.
.PP
\fBReport builder:\fR
.TP
\fBreport(&self, name: &str) -> ReportBuilder\fR
Returns a builder for running a named Frappe report.
.PP
\fBDoctype / resource builder:\fR
.TP
\fBdoctype(&self, name: &str) -> ResourceBuilder\fR
Builder for fetching document lists.
.TP
\fBget_doc(&self, doctype: &str, name: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Fetches a single document by name.
.TP
\fBcreate_doc(&self, doctype: &str, data: &impl Serialize) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Creates a new document. \fIdata\fR must implement \fBSerialize\fR.
.TP
\fBupdate_doc(&self, doctype: &str, name: &str, data: &impl Serialize) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Updates an existing document.
.TP
\fBdelete_doc(&self, doctype: &str, name: &str) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Deletes a document.
.TP
\fBcall_method(&self, method: &str, args: Option<HashMap<String, String>>) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Calls a whitelisted server method (e.g., \fBfrappe.email.send\fR) with optional arguments. The body is sent as a JSON POST.
.PP
\fBBoot data convenience accessors:\fR
.TP
\fBuser_info_map(&self) -> Option<&HashMap<String, BootUserInfo>>\fR
.TP
\fBsidebar_pages(&self) -> Option<&SidebarPages>\fR
.TP
\fBnavbar_settings(&self) -> Option<&NavbarSettings>\fR
.TP
\fBversions(&self) -> Option<&HashMap<String, String>>\fR
.TP
\fBlang_dict(&self) -> Option<&HashMap<String, String>>\fR
.TP
\fBfrequent_links(&self) -> Option<&[FrequentLink]>\fR
.TP
\fBis_developer_mode(&self) -> bool\fR
Returns true when \fBdeveloper_mode != 0\fR in the boot data.
.TP
\fBis_read_only(&self) -> bool\fR
Directly from the \fBread_only\fR field in boot data.
.PP
\fBTrait implementation:\fR \fBAuthEndpoints\fR is implemented for \fBRjssClient\fR, allowing static URL builders to be called through the type.
.SS AuthMode (enum)
Authentication strategy selection.
.PP
.nf
\fBpub enum AuthMode {\fR
    \fBSession {\fR
        \fBemail: secrecy::SecretString,\fR
        \fBpassword: secrecy::SecretString,\fR
    \fB},\fR
    \fBToken {\fR
        \fBapi_key: String,\fR
        \fBapi_secret: secrecy::SecretString,\fR
    \fB},\fR
\fB}\fR
.fi
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBSession\fR – logs in with email/password, manages session cookies, and automatically extracts the CSRF token from /app.
.IP \[bu]
\fBToken\fR – sends an \fBAuthorization: token api_key:api_secret\fR header on every request. No explicit login or logout is required.
.SS ClientConfig
Configuration container validated at client creation.
.PP
.nf
\fBpub struct ClientConfig {\fR
    \fBpub base_url: reqwest::Url,\fR
    \fBpub auth_mode: AuthMode,\fR
    \fBpub expected_sitename: Option<String>,\fR
    \fBpub required_roles: Vec<String>,\fR
    \fBpub timeout_secs: u64,          // default 30\fR
    \fBpub max_retries: u32,           // default 3\fR
    \fBpub user_agent: String,\fR
    \fBpub insecure_ssl: bool,         // default false\fR
\fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
\fBMethod:\fR
.TP
\fBvalidate(&self) -> Result<(), JssError>\fR
Ensures HTTPS is used unless \fBinsecure_ssl\fR is true, and that email and password are not empty for \fBSession\fR mode.
.SS JssError
Comprehensive error type covering all failure modes.
.PP
.nf
\fBpub enum JssError {\fR
    \fBConfig(String),\fR
    \fBValidation(String),\fR
    \fBNetwork(reqwest::Error),\fR
    \fBHttp { status: StatusCode, body: String },\fR
    \fBApiError { exc_type: String, message: String, status: StatusCode },\fR
    \fBAuth(String),\fR
    \fBCsrf(String),\fR
    \fBPermission(String),\fR
    \fBSitenameMismatch { expected: String, actual: String },\fR
    \fBNotAuthenticated,\fR
    \fBRateLimited { retry_after: Option<u64> },\fR
    \fBParse(String),\fR
    \fBExpired,\fR
    \fBCancelled,\fR
    \fBFileOperation(String),\fR
    \fBInternal(String),\fR
\fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
\fBHelper methods:\fR
.TP
\fBfrom_api_response(status: StatusCode, body: &str) -> JssError\fR
Parses a Frappe JSON error body. If \fBexc_type\fR is present, returns \fBApiError\fR; otherwise returns \fBHttp\fR.
.TP
\fBstatus_code(&self) -> StatusCode\fR
Maps each variant to an appropriate HTTP status code (e.g., \fBConfig\fR → 500, \fBNetwork\fR → 502, \fBAuth\fR → 401, \fBCsrf\fR → 403, \fBRateLimited\fR → 429).
.SS SessionInfo
Session data stored after a successful login.
.PP
.nf
\fBpub struct SessionInfo {\fR
    \fBpub sid: secrecy::SecretString,\fR
    \fBpub csrf_token: secrecy::SecretString,\fR
    \fBpub full_name: Option<String>,\fR
    \fBpub sitename: String,\fR
    \fBpub roles: Vec<String>,\fR
\fB}\fR
.fi
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBsid\fR – session ID from the login response.
.IP \[bu]
\fBcsrf_token\fR – token extracted from the \fB/app\fR page.
.IP \[bu]
\fBfull_name\fR – user’s full name (from boot or login response).
.IP \[bu]
\fBsitename\fR – site name from \fBfrappe.boot\fR.
.IP \[bu]
\fBroles\fR – user role list.
.SS FrappeBoot and related types
Data structure deserialized from the JavaScript \fBfrappe.boot\fR object on the \fB/app\fR page. All fields have defaults (mostly \fBOption\fR or empty collections). The full definition can be found in the source; here are the most important fields:
.PP
\fBFrappeBoot\fR:
.RS 4
.PP
.nf
\fBpub user: BootUser,\fR
\fBpub sitename: String,\fR
\fBpub csrf_token: String,\fR
\fBpub sysdefaults: SysDefaults,\fR
\fBpub app_logo_url: Option<String>,\fR
\fBpub home_page: Option<String>,\fR
\fBpub allow_modules: Vec<String>,\fR
\fBpub can_select: Vec<String>,\fR  (and similar permission vectors)
\fBpub all_reports: HashMap<String, ReportMeta>,\fR
\fBpub dashboards: Vec<DashboardMeta>,\fR
\fBpub user_info: HashMap<String, BootUserInfo>,\fR
\fBpub sidebar_pages: SidebarPages,\fR
\fBpub navbar_settings: Option<NavbarSettings>,\fR
\fBpub versions: HashMap<String, String>,\fR
\fBpub lang_dict: HashMap<String, String>,\fR
\fBpub frequently_visited_links: Vec<FrequentLink>,\fR
\fBpub developer_mode: i32,\fR
\fBpub read_only: bool,\fR
\fB...\fR
.fi
.RE
.PP
\fBBootUser\fR:
Contains the user’s \fBname\fR, \fBemail\fR, \fBfull_name\fR, \fBroles\fR, \fBuser_type\fR, \fBpermissions\fR (a map of doctype to allowed actions), and permission vectors like \fBcan_select\fR, \fBcan_write\fR, etc.
.PP
\fBSysDefaults\fR: \fBdefault_app: Option<String>\fR, \fBtime_zone: Option<String>\fR.
.PP
\fBReportMeta\fR: \fBmodified\fR, \fBtitle\fR, \fBref_doctype\fR, \fBreport_type\fR.
.PP
\fBDashboardMeta\fR: \fBname: String\fR.
.PP
\fBAppData\fR: \fBapp_name\fR, \fBapp_title\fR, \fBapp_route\fR, \fBapp_logo_url\fR, \fBmodules\fR, \fBworkspaces\fR.
.PP
\fBBootUserInfo\fR: \fBfullname\fR, \fBimage\fR, \fBname\fR, \fBemail\fR, \fBtime_zone\fR.
.PP
\fBSidebarPages\fR: \fBworkspace_setup_completed: Option<i32>\fR, \fBpages: Vec<SidebarPage>\fR, \fBhas_access: bool\fR, \fBhas_create_access: bool\fR.
.PP
\fBSidebarPage\fR: Many fields, see source code.
.PP
\fBNavbarSettings\fR: \fBsettings_dropdown: Vec<NavbarItem>\fR, \fBhelp_dropdown: Vec<NavbarItem>\fR.
.PP
\fBNavbarItem\fR: \fBitem_label\fR, \fBitem_type\fR, \fBaction\fR, \fBroute\fR, \fBhidden\fR, \fBis_standard\fR.
.PP
\fBPageInfo\fR: \fBtitle\fR, \fBmodified\fR.
.PP
\fBFrequentLink\fR: \fBroute: String\fR, \fBcount: i32\fR.
.SS AuthEndpoints (trait)
Implemented by \fBRjssClient\fR. Provides static URL builders that can be used without a client instance.
.PP
.nf
\fBpub trait AuthEndpoints {\fR
    \fBfn login_url(base: &Url) -> Result<Url, JssError>;\fR
    \fBfn logout_url(base: &Url) -> Result<Url, JssError>;\fR
    \fBfn csrf_token_url(base: &Url) -> Result<Url, JssError>;\fR
    \fBfn get_logged_user_url(base: &Url) -> Result<Url, JssError>;\fR
    \fBfn app_page_url(base: &Url) -> Result<Url, JssError>;\fR
\fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
Each yields URLs such as \fB/api/method/login\fR, \fB/api/method/logout\fR, etc.
.SS ReportBuilder
Built by \fBRjssClient::report()\fR. Allows chaining filters before executing a report.
.PP
\fBMethods:\fR
.TP
\fBadd_filter(mut self, field: &str, value: &str) -> Self\fR
Adds a (field, value) filter. Can be chained.
.TP
\fBasync run_raw(&self) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Runs the report and returns the raw JSON string.
.TP
\fBasync run<T: DeserializeOwned>(&self) -> Result<T, JssError>\fR
Runs the report and deserializes directly into \fIT\fR.
.SS ResourceBuilder
Built by \fBRjssClient::doctype()\fR. Builder for document listing with filters, field selection, ordering, and pagination.
.PP
\fBMethods:\fR
.TP
\fBfilter(mut self, field: &str, operator: &str, value: &str) -> Self\fR
Adds a filter condition (e.g., \fBfilter("status","=","Open")\fR).
.TP
\fBfields(mut self, fields: Vec<&str>) -> Self\fR
Specifies which fields to return (JSON array).
.TP
\fBorder_by(mut self, order: &str) -> Self\fR
Ordering (e.g., \fB"creation desc"\fR).
.TP
\fBlimit(mut self, limit: u32) -> Self\fR
Page size.
.TP
\fBlimit_start(mut self, start: u32) -> Self\fR
Starting index.
.TP
\fBasync execute_raw(&self) -> Result<String, JssError>\fR
Executes and returns raw JSON.
.TP
\fBasync execute<T: DeserializeOwned>(&self) -> Result<T, JssError>\fR
Executes and deserializes into \fIT\fR.
.TP
\fBasync all<T: DeserializeOwned>(&self) -> Result<Vec<T>, JssError>\fR
Automatically paginates with a page size of 200, collecting all records into a \fBVec<T>\fR.
.SS Additional public types
\fBUserInfo\fR: \fB{ message: UserInfoMessage }\fR, where \fBUserInfoMessage\fR has \fBname\fR, \fBemail: Option<String>\fR, \fBroles: Vec<String>\fR.
.PP
\fBLoginApiResponse\fR and \fBLoginApiMessage\fR are used internally for login parsing.
.SH USAGE EXAMPLES
.SS 1. Setup and session authentication
.nf
use librjss::{RjssClient, ClientConfig, AuthMode};
use secrecy::SecretString;

let config = ClientConfig {
    base_url: "https://app.example.com".parse().unwrap(),
    auth_mode: AuthMode::Session {
        email: SecretString::new("user@example.com".into()),
        password: SecretString::new("secret".into()),
    },
    ..Default::default()
};
let mut client = RjssClient::new(config)?;
client.authenticate().await?;
println!("Logged in as: {:?}", client.session_info().unwrap().full_name);
.fi
.SS 2. Basic GET and POST
.nf
let body = client.authenticated_get("/api/resource/ToDo").await?;
let resp = client.authenticated_post(
    "/api/resource/ToDo",
    r#"{"description":"test"}"#
).await?;
.fi
.SS 3. File upload
.nf
let image_bytes = std::fs::read("photo.png")?;
let result = client.upload_file(
    "photo.png", image_bytes, "Customer", "CUST-001", "image"
).await?;
println!("Upload response: {}", result);
.fi
.SS 4. File download
.nf
let bytes = client.download_file("/files/photo.png").await?;
std::fs::write("local.png", bytes)?;
// or directly
client.download_file_to_path("/files/photo.png", Path::new("local.png")).await?;
.fi
.SS 5. Running a report
.nf
#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct MyReportRow { /* ... */ }
let rows: Vec<MyReportRow> = client
    .report("Sales Analytics")
    .add_filter("from_date", "2026-01-01")
    .add_filter("to_date", "2026-06-30")
    .run()
    .await?;
.fi
.SS 6. Doctype listing with filters
.nf
let list: serde_json::Value = client
    .doctype("ToDo")
    .filter("status", "=", "Open")
    .fields(vec!["name", "description", "date"])
    .order_by("creation desc")
    .limit(50)
    .execute()
    .await?;

// Fetch all records
let all: Vec<ToDo> = client
    .doctype("ToDo")
    .filter("status", "=", "Cancelled")
    .all()
    .await?;
.fi
.SS 7. Single document CRUD
.nf
let doc = client.get_doc("Customer", "CUST-001").await?;

#[derive(Serialize)]
struct NewCustomer { customer_name: String, customer_group: String }
let new_cust = NewCustomer { ... };
let created = client.create_doc("Customer", &new_cust).await?;

let updated = client.update_doc("Customer", "CUST-001", &modification).await?;
let deleted = client.delete_doc("Customer", "OLD-CUST").await?;
.fi
.SS 8. Calling a server method
.nf
use std::collections::HashMap;
let mut args = HashMap::new();
args.insert("doctype".into(), "Sales Invoice".into());
args.insert("docname".into(), "SINV-0001".into());
let result = client.call_method("frappe.email.send", Some(args)).await?;
.fi
.SS 9. Error handling
.nf
match client.authenticated_get("/api/resource/ToDo").await {
    Err(JssError::ApiError { exc_type, message, status }) => {
        eprintln!("[{exc_type}] {message} (HTTP {status})");
    }
    Err(JssError::RateLimited { retry_after }) => {
        let secs = retry_after.unwrap_or(5);
        tokio::time::sleep(Duration::from_secs(secs)).await;
        // retry
    }
    Err(e) => {
        eprintln!("Other error: {}", e);
        let status_code = e.status_code();
        // ...
    }
    Ok(data) => { /* process data */ }
}
.fi
.SS 10. Accessing boot data
.nf
if let Some(boot) = client.boot() {
    println!("Site: {}", boot.sitename);
    println!("Roles: {:?}", boot.user.roles);
    for (doctype, perms) in &boot.user.permissions {
        println!("{} can: {:?}", doctype, perms);
    }
    if client.is_developer_mode() {
        println!("Developer mode active");
    }
}
.fi
.SH CONFIGURATION (ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES FOR CLI)
The following variables are used by the \fBcli_auth\fR binary and can be adopted in your own applications:
.TP
\fBJSS_BASE_URL\fR
Required. Base URL of the JSS instance.
.TP
\fBJSS_EMAIL\fR
Email for session auth.
.TP
\fBJSS_PASSWORD\fR
Password for session auth.
.TP
\fBJSS_TOKEN_API_KEY\fR
API key for token auth.
.TP
\fBJSS_TOKEN_API_SECRET\fR
API secret for token auth.
.TP
\fBJSS_EXPECTED_SITENAME\fR
Optional. Expected site name; login fails if the boot sitename does not match.
.TP
\fBJSS_REQUIRED_ROLES\fR
Optional. Comma-separated required roles.
.TP
\fBJSS_TIMEOUT_SECS\fR
Request timeout in seconds (default 30).
.TP
\fBJSS_MAX_RETRIES\fR
Maximum retry attempts (default 3).
.TP
\fBJSS_USER_AGENT\fR
Custom User-Agent header.
.TP
\fBJSS_INSECURE_SSL\fR
Set "true" to accept invalid TLS certificates (e.g., self-signed).
.SH MOCK SERVER FOR DEVELOPMENT
A full mock server is available at \fBexamples/jss_mock_server.rs\fR. It replicates the behaviour of a real JSS server:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fBPOST /api/method/login\fR → sets cookie + JSON
.IP \[bu]
\fBGET  /app\fR → HTML with \fBfrappe.boot\fR
.IP \[bu]
\fBGET  /api/method/frappe.auth.get_logged_user\fR
.IP \[bu]
\fBPOST /api/method/logout\fR
.IP \[bu]
\fBGET  /api/method/frappe.auth.get_csrf_token\fR (returns 417)
.PP
Start it with:
.PP
\fBcargo run --example jss_mock_server\fR
.PP
Then point the client to \fBhttp://127.0.0.1:8080\fR and set \fBJSS_INSECURE_SSL=true\fR.
.SH TESTING
Unit tests (no server required):
.PP
\fBcargo test --lib\fR
.PP
Integration tests require the mock server to be running. Once the server is up:
.PP
\fBcargo test --test client_tests\fR
\fBcargo test --test file_tests\fR
\fBcargo test --test report_tests\fR
\fBcargo test --test resource_tests\fR
.PP
Or run everything:
.PP
\fBcargo test --workspace\fR
.SH CI PIPELINE
The file \fB.github/workflows/ci.yml\fR runs on every push/PR to master:
.IP \[bu] 2
Format check (\fBrustfmt\fR)
.IP \[bu]
Lint (\fBclippy -D warnings\fR)
.IP \[bu]
\fBcargo check --workspace\fR
.IP \[bu]
Unit tests (\fBcargo test --lib\fR)
.IP \[bu]
Start mock server → integration tests
.IP \[bu]
Release build
.IP \[bu]
Upload \fBcli_auth\fR artifact
.SH LICENSE
MIT License – see LICENSE file.
.PP
Copyright (c) 2026 mroczect <mroczect@proton.me>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cargo (1),
.BR reqwest (7),
.BR serde (7)
.PP
The full source code and examples are available at
.UR https://github.com/mroczect/librjss
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
mroczect <mroczect@proton.me>
